    Risk-controlled post-hoc rescue of rare cell types in single-cell
                    RNA-seq under label scarcity
                                              Anonymous Authors
                                                   Afﬁliation
                                            corresponding@author


                                                      Abstract

      Motivation: Rare cell types in single-cell RNA-seq are systematically missed by semi-supervised clas-
      siﬁers when few rare cells are labelled, and naively over-predicting the rare class inﬂates false positives
      that can be more damaging than the missed cells. A method recovering rare cells with an explicit error-
      rate bound is needed.
      Results: scRareReﬁne is a post-hoc module reﬁning a frozen scANVI backbone via an anisotropic
      prototype-membership score and a split-conformal threshold with three abstention gates, calibrated only
      on held-out data to target a false-rescue rate (FFR) budget of α = 0.01 (empirical, not ﬁnite-sample).
      Across six datasets, nine methods and three splits, it raises mean rare-cell F1 in the label-scarce regime
      from 0.72 (scANVI) to 0.88 while keeping worst-case FFR at 0.0098, the only method achieving both.
      It abstains to the backbone when rescue is unwarranted, so it does not underperform scANVI (dataset-
      clustered bootstrap, sign-test p = 0.031). We characterise failure modes, including a recall ceiling for
      entangled rare types.
      Availability and implementation: Code and reproduction scripts are available at https://github.
      com/scrarerefine/scrarerefine.
      Contact: corresponding@author



1    Introduction
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) routinely resolves the major cell types of a tissue, but the pop-
ulations that matter most for a biological question are often the rare ones: a small dendritic-cell subset, a
sparse endocrine population, or a handful of mast cells. Automated annotation methods trained with only a
few labelled examples of such a type tend to absorb its cells into a transcriptionally adjacent majority class.
Semi-supervised models such as scANVI (Xu et al., 2021), which combine a variational backbone with a
small amount of label information, are a strong default for this task, yet they inherit the same difﬁculty:
when the labelled budget for a rare type is small, the type is under-represented in the supervised signal and
is systematically missed at test time.
     A natural reﬂex is to make the classiﬁer more willing to predict the rare class. This does recover some
missed cells, but it also relabels majority cells that merely sit near the rare population, inﬂating false pos-
itives. In many downstream analyses a false rare call (e.g. reporting mast cells where there are none) is
more costly than a missed one. The practical problem is therefore not simply “predict more rare cells” but
“recover missed rare cells without paying an uncontrolled false-positive cost” — and to do so inductively,
using only information available at training and calibration time.
     We address this with scRareReﬁne, a lightweight post-hoc module that reﬁnes, rather than replaces,
the predictions of a frozen scANVI backbone (Fig. 1). scRareReﬁne ﬁrst builds a class prototype for every

                                                          1
labelled training type in the scANVI latent space and scores each query cell by an anisotropic membership
distance to the rare prototype, normalised by each class’s compactness. It then decides which cells to
relabel through a calibration step performed entirely on a held-out validation set: a conformal threshold on
validation non-rare scores controls the false-rescue rate, and three abstention gates — a separability safety
net, a necessity guard, and a validation-adaptive candidate-rank selector — prevent the module from acting
when rescue is unsafe or unnecessary. The reference prototypes come only from the training set and every
threshold comes only from the validation set; test labels are used exclusively for ﬁnal evaluation.
     The central design choice is to trade a little recall for a controlled false-rescue rate (FFR). We ﬁx the
FFR budget to a publication-grade α = 0.01 across all datasets and never tune it, so that improvements in
rare-cell F1 are never bought with an uncontrolled increase in false positives. Because the module abstains
when its gates are not satisﬁed, it reduces exactly to the backbone on datasets where rescue is not warranted;
its beneﬁt is concentrated in the genuinely label-scarce, genuinely-missed regime.

Contributions.

   1. A risk-controlled rescue module. scRareReﬁne is a fully inductive, post-hoc reﬁnement of a frozen
      scANVI classiﬁer that recovers missed rare cells while holding the false-rescue rate below a ﬁxed
      budget α = 0.01 (Section 2).

   2. Label-scarce gains with controlled FFR. Across six datasets, nine methods and three splits, scRar-
      eReﬁne attains the highest mean rare-cell F1 in the label-scarce regime (0.88 vs. 0.72 for scANVI)
      and is the only method whose worst-case FFR stays ≤ α; it does not underperform scANVI in this
      regime, and a dataset-clustered bootstrap over the six datasets conﬁrms the improvement is not driven
      by any single dataset (sign-test p = 0.031) (Section 3.2).

   3. Component analysis. A leave-one-out ablation shows that the adaptive candidate-rank selector is
      the component that drives F1, the conformal threshold is what controls FFR, and the two gates act as
      safety mechanisms that prevent regressions rather than as performance boosters (Section 3.3).

   4. An honest analysis of the separability gate. Through a controlled stress test and a benchmark-wide
      sensitivity sweep we show that the gate threshold is a deliberately conservative, pre-speciﬁed prior
      whose risk axis is dataset-dependent, and we report where it is too cautious (Section 3.4).

   5. Characterised failure modes. We delineate the regime in which the method is a no-op and its con-
      crete limitations, including a recall ceiling for rare types that are geometrically entangled with a
      majority population (Section 4).

Related work. Reference-based annotation methods — logistic-regression CellTypist (Domínguez Conde
et al., 2022), imbalance-aware scBalance (Cheng et al., 2023), and the interpretable transformer TOSICA
(Chen et al., 2023) — transfer labels from a reference but do not provide an explicit false-positive guarantee
for a target rare type, and their accuracy degrades when the rare type is sparsely labelled. Rare-population
discovery methods such as scCAD (Xu et al., 2024) detect anomalous clusters in an unsupervised manner;
mapping such discoveries onto a speciﬁc rare type incurs an inherent precision penalty. Prototype and
semi-supervised approaches, including the scVI/scANVI family (Lopez et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2021) and
prototype classiﬁers, motivate our latent-space prototype scoring but do not target the scarce-label rescue
problem with risk control. Conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2023) provides
the distribution-free machinery we use to translate a validation calibration set into a bound on the false-
rescue rate. Conformal inference has very recently been introduced to single-cell annotation by López-De-
Castro et al. (2025), who use it to attach coverage-guaranteed prediction sets and to ﬂag out-of-distribution


                                                      2
Figure 1: Overview of scRareReﬁne. A frozen scANVI backbone produces a latent embedding and a
prediction for every cell. On the training set we build class prototypes; for each query cell we compute an
anisotropic rare-membership score. A validation set calibrates a conformal threshold and three abstention
gates so that the false-rescue rate stays below α. At test time, candidate cells whose score exceeds the
threshold are relabelled to the rare class. Reference prototypes use only training cells; all thresholds use
only validation cells.


cells; that work controls the marginal coverage of a prediction set over all cells, whereas scRareReﬁne uses
conformal calibration for a different objective — a directed, per-type bound on the rate at which a speciﬁc
rare type is falsely called. scRareReﬁne thus combines latent-space prototype geometry with conformal
calibration to obtain a rescue that is both effective in the scarce regime and risk-controlled, a combination
not offered by prior methods.


2     System and methods
2.1   Setup and inductive protocol
Let a dataset contain cells with expression proﬁles and a single designated rare type r. We split cells
into training, validation and test partitions using a batch-/donor-held-out scheme (target 70/15/15), so that
validation and test cells come from donors unseen during training; this is the harder, more realistic inductive
setting. A semi-supervised scANVI model (Xu et al., 2021), itself initialised from an scVI model (Lopez
et al., 2018), is trained on the training partition with all majority cells labelled and only a limited budget
of rare cells labelled. The labelled rare budget is max(5, ⌊p Ntrr ⌋) for a nominal fraction p, where Ntrr is
the number of rare cells in the training partition; the ﬂoor of ﬁve reﬂects the minimum needed to estimate a
prototype. The model yields, for every cell, a latent embedding z ∈ Rd and a predicted label. scRareReﬁne
consumes these frozen outputs and never retrains the backbone.




                                                      3
2.2   Prototype-membership scoring
                                                                                           P
For each class c observed among the labelled training cells we form a prototype µc = |S1c | i∈Sc zi , the
                                                                                             
mean latent of its labelled cells Sc , and a robust radius rc = max mediani∈Sc ∥zi − µc ∥, ϵ (set to a
conservative default when |Sc | < 3). For a query cell with embedding z we deﬁne an anisotropic rare-
membership score
                                                      ∥z − µ ∥ h i
                                                                c
                                  s(z) = softmaxc −                r ,                                (1)
                                                             rc
i.e. the rare-class component of a softmax over per-class distances normalised by each class’s compactness.
The per-class normalisation lets the score adapt to classes of different spread and limits intrusion from a
tight neighbouring majority cluster. We also deﬁne a train-only separability ratio

                                                  minc̸=r ∥µr − µc ∥
                                         ρ =     1 P                   ,                                    (2)
                                                |Sr |  i∈Sr ∥zi − µr ∥

the distance from the rare prototype to its nearest majority prototype divided by the mean rare intra-class
radius; ρ measures how geometrically distinct the rare type is, using only training information.

2.3   Algorithm: conformal calibration and abstention gates
Given the frozen scores, scRareReﬁne decides which test cells to relabel using only validation labels. Three
gates and one threshold are applied in sequence (Algorithm 1).

Separability gate. If ρ < ρlow the rare and majority populations are too entangled for prototype rescue to
be safe and the module abstains. We ﬁx ρlow = 1.3 as a dataset-independent prior (Section 3.4).

Necessity guard. If the validation backbone already recovers the rare type — speciﬁcally if the number of
validation rare cells it misses is below M — rescue is unnecessary and may only add noise, so the module
abstains. We ﬁx M = 3, the minimum support needed for the validation-adaptive selection below to carry
signal.

Conformal threshold. Let the validation non-rare scores be s1 , . . . , sn . We set the threshold τ to the
ﬁnite-sample (1 − α) conservative order statistic τ = s(k⋆ ) with k ⋆ = ⌈(1 − α)(n + 1)⌉ (and τ = +∞,
i.e. no rescue, if k ⋆ > n). Under exchangeability of validation and test non-rare cells, relabelling only cells
with s ≥ τ bounds the marginal probability that a non-rare cell is rescued at α.

Validation-adaptive candidate rank. A cell is a candidate only if the rare prototype is among its k
nearest prototypes (isotropic Euclidean rank ≤ k) and its backbone label is not already rare. We choose
k ∈ {1, 2, 3} on validation as the value that maximises validation rare-cell F1 subject to a Wilson 95%
upper bound on the validation FFR not exceeding α, breaking ties toward the smaller (more conservative)
k. Using the Wilson upper bound rather than a point estimate guards against the validation/test distribution
shift induced by donor-held-out splits.

Rescue rule. A test cell is relabelled to r iff it is a candidate (rank ≤ k) and s ≥ τ . All other predictions
are left unchanged.




                                                       4
Algorithm 1 scRareReﬁne conformal rescue (inductive)
Require: frozen latents and predictions for train/val/test; rare type r; budget α
 1: ﬁt prototypes {µc }, radii {rc }, separability ρ on labelled train cells
 2: if ρ < ρlow then return backbone predictions                                           ▷ separability gate
 3: end if
 4: vmiss ← #validation rare cells missed by backbone
 5: if vmiss < M then return backbone predictions                                           ▷ necessity guard
 6: end if
 7: compute scores Eq. (1) for val and test; set τ from val non-rare scores
 8: choose k ∈ {1, 2, 3} maximising val rare-F1 s.t. Wilson-upper val-FFR ≤ α
 9: for each test cell: relabel to r if rank≤ k and s ≥ τ
10: return reﬁned test predictions



2.4   False-rescue rate
We quantify the cost of rescue by the false-rescue rate,

                                         {non-rare test cells relabelled to r}
                              FFR =                                            .
                                                {non-rare test cells}

The conformal threshold and gates are designed so that FFR is controlled at the ﬁxed budget α = 0.01.
Because validation and test cells come from different donors under our split, this control provides marginal
(not per-dataset conditional) coverage and is empirical rather than a strict ﬁnite-sample guarantee; we report
FFR with raw counts and treat α as a ﬁxed prior, never tuned per dataset.

2.5   Implementation
scRareReﬁne is implemented as a lightweight post-processing layer in Python (NumPy/SciPy) that con-
sumes only the frozen latent embeddings and label predictions exported by an existing scANVI/scVI model;
it requires no modiﬁcation to, or retraining of, the backbone, and adds negligible runtime (prototype ﬁtting
and scoring are O(Ntrain d) and O(Ntest Cd) for C classes and latent dimension d). Benchmarking used
scvi-tools for the scANVI/scVI backbone and standard scientiﬁc-Python tooling for prototypes, conformal
calibration and evaluation; comparator methods used their respective published implementations. All splits,
seeds, per-run manifests and the exact conﬁguration used for every reported number are released with the
code (Supplementary S1); see the Availability and implementation statement in the Abstract for the reposi-
tory location.


3     Results
3.1   Experimental setup
We evaluate on six scRNA-seq datasets, each with a designated rare type: human immune dendritic cells
(ASDC), Baron pancreas (gamma) (Baron et al., 2016), an integrated human pancreas (endothelial), and
three Tabula Sapiens subsets (Tabula Sapiens Consortium, 2022) — lung (lymphatic endothelial), small
intestine (tuft) and stomach (mast). For every dataset we use a donor-held-out 70/15/15 split and vary
the labelled rare fraction over {0.01, 0.05, 0.10, all}, repeating each conﬁguration over three random seeds
(42, 43, 44). We compare scRareReﬁne against eight methods that read the same split and the same labelled
subset: the scANVI backbone, a k-NN classiﬁer on the scANVI latent, CellTypist, scBalance, ProtoCloud,

                                                      5
Figure 2: Main result. (a) Mean rare-cell F1 in the label-scarce regime (p ≤ 0.10), averaged over six
datasets, three fractions and three seeds. (b) Worst-case FFR over the whole benchmark; the dashed line is
the budget α = 0.01. scRareReﬁne is the only method that combines the highest scarce-regime F1 with a
worst-case FFR ≤ α. † HiCat is transductive.

Table 1: Per-dataset rare-cell F1 in the label-scarce regime (mean over fractions p ≤ 0.10 and three
seeds). FFRmax is the worst-case false-rescue rate for scRareReﬁne over the same conﬁgurations.

              Dataset (rare type)           scANVI     Best baseline      scRareReﬁne    FFRmax
              immune dendritic (ASDC)        0.59        0.72 (kNN)          0.94         0.0010
              Baron pancreas (gamma)         0.53        0.46 (kNN)          0.66         0.0098
              lung (lymphatic EC)            0.72        0.92 (kNN)          0.98         0.0029
              small intestine (tuft)         0.98        0.98 (kNN)          0.98         0.0005
              stomach (mast)                 0.61     0.49 (CellTypist)      0.72         0.0002
              integrated pancreas (endo.)    0.89        0.98 (kNN)          1.00         0.0006


scCAD, TOSICA, and HiCat. HiCat is transductive (its dimensionality reduction is ﬁt on combined train
and test cells) and is therefore reported as an upper-bound reference rather than a fair inductive competitor;
TOSICA is run with its default pathway conﬁguration. We report rare-cell F1 and the false-rescue rate
(FFR), aggregated as mean ± standard deviation over seeds. Because the labelled budget is max(5, ⌊p Ntrr ⌋),
several nominal fractions collapse to the same labelled set on small-rare datasets; we therefore report the
label-scarce comparison over the 15 distinct labelled conﬁgurations rather than the 18 nominal ones.

3.2   scRareReﬁne improves rare-cell F1 in the scarce regime with controlled FFR
Across the label-scarce regime scRareReﬁne attains the highest mean rare-cell F1 of all nine methods
(Fig. 2a): 0.88, against 0.72 for the scANVI backbone and 0.73 for the next-best inductive method (k-
NN on the scANVI latent); the remaining methods range from 0.49 to 0.65, and the transductive HiCat
reference is lower (0.19) because it returns no rare cells on several datasets. Per dataset (Table 1), scRareRe-
ﬁne is the best or tied-best inductive method on all six datasets, with the largest gains where the backbone
is weakest (immune dendritic cells, 0.59 → 0.94; stomach mast cells, 0.61 → 0.72).
    This F1 advantage is not bought with an uncontrolled false-positive cost. scRareReﬁne is the only
method whose worst-case FFR over the whole benchmark stays within budget (0.0098 ≤ α, Fig. 2b); by
contrast scCAD (0.045), scBalance (0.016) and TOSICA (0.036) exceed it. A paired analysis over the

                                                       6
Figure 3: Per-dataset rescue in the label-scarce regime (p ≤ 0.10, mean over three seeds). (a) scRareRe-
ﬁne rare-cell F1 for each dataset × labelled-fraction cell. (b) Improvement over the scANVI backbone (∆
F1 = scRareReﬁne − scANVI); every cell is non-negative, so the module never lowers F1 relative to the
backbone, and the largest gains fall on the sparsely labelled columns of the datasets the backbone handles
worst (immune dendritic, lung, integrated pancreas at p = 0.01).


54 scarce conﬁgurations (six datasets × three distinct fractions × three seeds) shows that scRareReﬁne
does not underperform the backbone: 29 wins, 25 ties — the ties are abstentions — and 0 losses, with a
mean F1 improvement of +0.16 (per-conﬁguration bootstrap 95% CI [+0.09, +0.24], one-sided Wilcoxon
p ≤ 1.3 × 10−6 treating all 54 conﬁgurations as independent). Because seeds and collapsed fractions
within a dataset are correlated, we treat that test as liberal and additionally run a dataset-clustered bootstrap
that resamples whole datasets (the six biologically independent units) rather than conﬁgurations: against
scANVI this gives a mean ∆F1 of +0.16 with a 95% CI of [+0.08, +0.25] (20 000 resamples) and, at the
coarser per-dataset level, scRareReﬁne improves scANVI on 5/6 datasets with 0 losses (one exact tie, on
the already-saturated small-intestine tuft dataset; sign-test p = 0.031). The two tests agree in direction and
magnitude; we report both because the dataset-clustered version is the more conservative unit of resampling
given the correlation structure (Supplementary S2). Because the labelled budget has a ﬂoor of ﬁve cells, the
18 nominal scarce conﬁgurations collapse to 15 distinct ones; over these, scRareReﬁne beats the majority
of baselines in 15/15 and is the single best method in 14/15 (Supplementary S3).
    Figure 3 resolves the per-method summary of Fig. 2 into the scRareReﬁne F1 grid and its improvement
over the backbone: the gains concentrate in the most label-scarce columns of the datasets the backbone
handles worst, and no cell is negative. Figure 4 shows the same effect as an across-conﬁguration distribution
— scRareReﬁne attains the highest and tightest F1 median (0.96) and lacks the long lower tail that the
backbone and baselines inherit from the conﬁgurations on which they miss the rare type.

3.3   Component ablation
In the label-scarce regime the full method raises mean rare-cell F1 from 0.72 (backbone) to 0.88 (Fig. 5, left).
Removing each component in turn separates two roles, and each ablated variant is itself a legitimate rescue
baseline (an alternative post-hoc design one could have shipped instead of the full method), so we read this
panel as a baseline comparison rather than only a component audit. The validation-adaptive candidate-rank

                                                       7
Figure 4: Across-conﬁguration distribution of rare-cell F1 in the label-scarce regime. Each box sum-
marises a method over 54 scarce conﬁgurations (six datasets × three fractions × three seeds); points are
individual conﬁgurations. scRareReﬁne has the highest and tightest F1 distribution (median 0.96), while the
backbone and the strongest baselines carry long lower tails from the datasets and fractions on which they
miss the rare type. † HiCat is transductive.


selector is the only component that materially raises F1: replacing it with the most conservative ﬁxed rank
(k = 1) lowers mean F1 from 0.88 to 0.87. The conformal threshold and the two gates, by contrast, barely
change mean F1 but are what keep the method safe. Removing the conformal threshold – an uncalibrated-
threshold rescue baseline – leaves mean F1 essentially unchanged (0.88) yet pushes the worst-case FFR to
0.0165, above budget; removing the separability gate – an ungated rescue baseline that ﬁres regardless of
how entangled the rare type is with its neighbours – even raises mean F1 (to 0.90) but likewise breaks the
budget (worst-case FFR 0.0153); and removing the necessity guard leaves the benchmark mean unchanged
(0.88, worst-case FFR 0.0098) but causes per-dataset regressions on already-saturated datasets. Each of
these three baselines is thus dominated by the full method once FFR is held to budget: they either match or
exceed scRareReﬁne’s F1 but violate α, or match its FFR while regressing F1 on individual datasets – no
ablated variant dominates the full method on both axes simultaneously. The rank-sensitivity panel (Fig. 5,
right) conﬁrms the value of adapting k: every ﬁxed choice is dominated in F1 by the adaptive selector (k=1:
0.87, k=2: 0.85, k=3: 0.84 vs. adaptive 0.88), and the most permissive ﬁxed rank (k=3) – a ﬁxed-rank-3
rescue baseline – drives the worst-case FFR to 0.046, far above budget, whereas the adaptive selector stays
within it (0.0098). In summary, the adaptive rank drives F1, the conformal threshold controls FFR, and the
two gates prevent regressions rather than boosting F1; and against every one of these four ablated-variant
baselines, the full method is the only conﬁguration that stays within the FFR budget without giving up F1.

3.4   The separability gate is a conservative, dataset-dependent prior
The separability gate uses a ﬁxed, dataset-independent threshold (ρlow = 1.3). We probe this choice from
two directions. First, a controlled semi-synthetic stress test progressively entangles a rare population (lung
lymphatic endothelial cells) toward its nearest majority type; rescue without the gate stays within the FFR
budget down to separability ≈ 0.76 and produces a single marginal violation (18 false rescues out of 1716,


                                                      8
Figure 5: Ablation (label-scarce regime), read as a baseline comparison. Each leave-one-out variant
is an alternative rescue design (an uncalibrated-threshold, ungated, or ﬁxed-rank baseline) rather than only
a component audit. Left: the four leave-one-out variants, per dataset (F1 top row, worst-case FFR bottom
row); the dashed line is the budget α = 0.01. Right: candidate-rank sensitivity (ﬁxed k ∈ {1, 2, 3} baselines
vs. the validation-adaptive selector), mean F1 and worst-case FFR. Removing the conformal threshold or
the separability gate barely changes — or even raises — mean F1 but breaks the FFR budget; the adaptive
rank is the component that raises F1; a ﬁxed rank = 3 over-ﬁres FFR. No ablated-variant baseline dominates
the full method on both F1 and FFR simultaneously.


FFR 0.0105) only at the lowest separability (≈ 0.69), well below the gate (Fig. 6). Second, a benchmark-
wide sweep of the gate threshold (Supplementary S4) shows that 1.3 is the smallest threshold that keeps the
worst-case FFR within budget on real data: lowering it to ≤ 1.0 raises mean scarce-regime F1 by 0.024
(0.878 → 0.902) but admits two FFR violations (worst-case 0.0153, on the low-separability Baron-pancreas
conﬁgurations at ρ ≈ 1.22), whereas raising it to 1.6 only sacriﬁces F1 (0.878 → 0.838) with no further FFR
beneﬁt. The two experiments disagree on where rescue becomes unsafe (≈ 1.22 on real Baron pancreas vs.
≈ 0.69 on the synthetic sweep), which is the central observation: separability alone does not monotonically
determine rescue risk. We therefore present 1.3 not as a located collapse boundary but as a deliberately
conservative, pre-speciﬁed prior chosen by the FFR constraint rather than tuned for F1 — lowering it would
in fact raise mean F1 — that occasionally abstains where rescue would have been safe.

3.5   Qualitative rescue in latent space
We visualise the scANVI latent embedding with UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018).
    Fig. 7 visualises the rescue on immune dendritic cells in the scANVI latent space. Of the true rare cells,
the backbone recovers those forming a compact cluster (recall 0.72). scRareReﬁne relabels 23 further cells
lying at the edge of this cluster, raising recall to 0.90 at precision 0.99, with a single false rescue. The 13 rare
cells that remain missed are scattered far from the rare prototype; admitting them would require widening
the candidate pool past the FFR budget. This is the geometric recall ceiling discussed in Section 4.


4     Discussion
scRareReﬁne is a conservative, risk-controlled rescuer, and its value is concentrated in a speciﬁc regime
rather than uniform across all settings. We make this scope explicit.

The method is conditional by design. Two abstention gates cause scRareReﬁne to return the unmodiﬁed
backbone prediction whenever the rare and majority prototypes are too entangled or the validation backbone
already recovers the rare type. On datasets where the backbone is already saturated, the module therefore
reduces exactly to scANVI — it neither helps nor harms — and its beneﬁt is restricted to the genuinely label-
scarce, genuinely missed regime. This conditional behaviour is what underwrites the “never underperforms


                                                         9
Figure 6: Separability-gate analysis. Controlled semi-synthetic stress test that progressively entangles a
rare type toward its nearest majority population, read from right to left as entanglement increases (the x-axis
shows separability ρ on its natural, increasing scale). Ungated rescue stays FFR-safe well below the gate at
ρ = 1.3 and produces only a single marginal violation at the lowest separability, on the left edge of the plot;
the gate abstains (ρ < 1.3) before rescue reaches that point. The budget α = 0.01 is the dashed line.


the backbone” property: it holds by construction of the abstention mechanism, so the paired comparison
should be read as evidence that rescue, when it ﬁres, does not hurt, rather than as an unconditional dominance
claim.

A recall ceiling for entangled rare types. For a rare type that is transcriptionally interleaved with a
majority population, prototype-distance rescue has an intrinsic ceiling: a substantial fraction of true rare
cells fall at candidate rank ≥ 3, where admitting them would require widening the candidate pool past the
point at which the FFR budget is exceeded. The adaptive-rank selector correctly refuses to do so, so recall
plateaus (Fig. 7). Breaking this ceiling likely requires expression-side signals (e.g. marker genes) and is left
to future work; we report below that a ﬁrst attempt at incorporating such signals did not succeed under our
inductive constraints, so this is a harder problem than it may appear.

Marker-gene validation did not help. Before converging on the purely embedding-based prototype-
and-conformal design used in the main pipeline, we implemented and evaluated two earlier strategies
that additionally scored rescue candidates against curated marker-gene expression: a marker-gated vari-
ant (gate_marker) and a linear score-fusion variant (fusion) that combined the prototype-membership
score with a marker-expression score. On our development data, all three strategies – prototype-only gat-
ing, marker-gated, and fusion – converged to the same rare-cell F1, and the marker signal changed neither
the selected candidates nor the outcome. We also found that the natural marker-threshold analogue of our
conformal calibration is not informative in this setting: the validation-calibrated marker threshold collapses
to the least restrictive value the search considers (equivalent to no ﬁltering), and the corresponding test-set
false-rescue rate at that threshold is zero, which reﬂects an already-clean candidate set from the embedding
geometry rather than any discriminative contribution from marker expression. We disclose this negative re-
sult rather than omitting it: it indicates that, at least for the rare-vs-majority pairs in our six datasets, curated
marker panels are largely redundant with the scANVI latent geometry once anisotropic prototype distance is
used, and that closing the recall ceiling above will likely require a different source of signal (e.g. pathway-


                                                         10
level scores, spatial context, or a learned rather than curated marker set) rather than a simple threshold or
linear fusion on top of the existing markers. This experiment used only training/validation partitions and is
consistent with the inductive, test-blind protocol used throughout; no marker-based mechanism is part of the
released method.

FFR control is marginal and empirical, and can sit near the boundary. The conformal threshold pro-
vides marginal FFR control under validation calibration, not a per-dataset conditional or strict ﬁnite-sample
guarantee on test: under donor-held-out splits the exchangeability assumption is only approximately sat-
isﬁed, and on one dataset (Baron pancreas) the worst-case test FFR reaches the α = 0.01 budget. That
worst case rests on the dataset with the fewest rare cells and thus the widest binomial uncertainty, so the true
operating point could sit on either side of the budget; we mitigate this with a Wilson upper bound for rank
selection and report all FFR values with raw counts, but the budget should be read as empirical, marginal
control under distribution shift rather than a guarantee.

Seed sensitivity at extreme scarcity. At the smallest budget (ﬁve labelled rare cells) the improvement on
one dataset is positive on average but unstable across seeds, mirroring the variance of the backbone itself; the
instability disappears once at least ten rare cells are labelled. We therefore do not claim stable improvement
at the ﬁve-label point on that dataset.

Evaluation caveats. Because the labelled budget has a ﬂoor of ﬁve, several nominal label fractions col-
lapse to the same labelled set on small-rare datasets; we report distinct conﬁgurations to avoid double-
counting. The per-conﬁguration signiﬁcance test pairs predictions by (dataset, fraction, seed); because these
cells are correlated across seeds and near-duplicated across collapsed fractions, we treat that test as liberal
and use a dataset-clustered bootstrap (resampling whole datasets) as our primary evidence instead (Supple-
mentary S2). With only six datasets, the dataset-clustered analysis has limited power in absolute terms – the
best it can report is a sign-test p = 0.031 – and we report it precisely because it is the honest, conservative
unit of replication rather than because it is a strong result on its own. We evaluate six predominantly human
single-cell datasets and do not test cross-species or disease-state transfer, both of which would further stress
the exchangeability assumption. Finally, scRareReﬁne operates on scANVI embeddings; whether the same
conformal rescue adds value on top of single-cell foundation-model embeddings is untested.

Relation to conformal single-cell annotation. López-De-Castro et al. (2025) bring conformal prediction
to single-cell annotation to produce prediction sets with guaranteed marginal coverage and to detect out-of-
distribution cells. scRareReﬁne shares the conformal calibration machinery but targets a different quantity:
rather than covering the true label of every cell, it bounds the rate at which one designated rare type is falsely
assigned. The two are complementary — a coverage-guaranteed prediction set quantiﬁes uncertainty for all
cells, whereas a directed false-rescue bound is what a practitioner needs when the decision is speciﬁcally
whether to trust newly reported rare cells.

Outlook. The combination of latent-space prototype geometry with conformal calibration offers a gen-
eral template for risk-controlled post-hoc reﬁnement. Natural extensions include expression-side scoring
to address the recall ceiling, batch-conditional calibration to tighten FFR control under donor shift, and
application on top of foundation-model embeddings.




                                                       11
5    Conclusion
We introduced scRareReﬁne, a fully inductive post-hoc module that reﬁnes a frozen scANVI classiﬁer to
recover rare cell types under label scarcity while keeping the false-rescue rate below a ﬁxed budget. By
scoring cells with training-only prototype distances and gating relabelling with validation-only conformal
calibration, the method raises rare-cell F1 in the label-scarce regime — the only method in our benchmark to
do so with a controlled worst-case false-rescue rate — and abstains when rescue is not warranted, a property
that holds by construction rather than as an unconditional dominance claim (§4, “The method is conditional
by design”). We further provided an honest analysis of its conservative separability gate, its failure modes,
and a prior internal negative result on marker-gene fusion. Risk-controlled reﬁnement is a practical way
to recover rare populations without paying an uncontrolled false-positive cost, and we hope it encourages
reporting the operating point, not only the accuracy, of rare-cell annotation methods.
    In summary: (i) scRareReﬁne is a post-hoc, inductive module that rescues missed rare cells on top
of a frozen scANVI classiﬁer without retraining the backbone; (ii) it couples training-only prototype-
membership scoring with validation-only conformal calibration and three abstention gates to hold the false-
rescue rate below a ﬁxed budget α = 0.01; (iii) in the label-scarce regime it raises mean rare-cell F1 from
0.72 to 0.88 across six datasets while being the only method with worst-case FFR ≤ α, and it abstains –
returning the backbone – when rescue is unsafe; and (iv) the leave-one-out baseline comparison attributes
F1 gains to the validation-adaptive candidate rank and FFR control to the conformal threshold and gates,
while a controlled separability sweep shows the gate is a deliberately conservative, not an over-ﬁtted, prior.


Supplementary material
Supplementary Material (S1–S8: reproduction protocol, dataset-clustered and per-conﬁguration signiﬁcance
tables, distinct labelled conﬁgurations, and the separability-gate threshold sweep) is provided as a standalone
document, supplement.pdf, distributed alongside this manuscript and referenced throughout the text as
“Supplementary Sn”.


Acknowledgements
We thank the maintainers of the public single-cell atlases used in this study.


Funding
[To be completed.]


References
Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. Conformal prediction: A gentle introduction. Foundations
  and Trends in Machine Learning, 16(4):494–591, 2023. doi: 10.1561/2200000101.

Maayan Baron, Adrian Veres, Samuel L Wolock, Aubrey L Faust, Renaud Gaujoux, Amedeo Vetere, et al.
 A single-cell transcriptomic map of the human and mouse pancreas reveals inter- and intra-cell population
 structure. Cell Systems, 3(4):346–360, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2016.08.011.




                                                      12
Jiawei Chen, Hao Xu, Wanyu Tao, Zhaoxiong Chen, Yuxuan Zhao, and Jing-Dong J Han. Transformer
   for one stop interpretable cell type annotation. Nature Communications, 14(1):223, 2023. doi: 10.1038/
   s41467-023-35923-4.

Yuqi Cheng, Xingyu Fan, Jianing Zhang, and Yu Li. A scalable sparse neural network framework for rare
  cell type annotation of single-cell transcriptome data. Communications Biology, 6(1):545, 2023. doi:
  10.1038/s42003-023-04928-6.

C Domínguez Conde, C Xu, L B Jarvis, D B Rainbow, S B Wells, T Gomes, et al. Cross-tissue immune cell
  analysis reveals tissue-speciﬁc features in humans. Science, 376(6594):eabl5197, 2022. doi: 10.1126/
  science.abl5197.

Romain Lopez, Jeffrey Regier, Michael B Cole, Michael I Jordan, and Nir Yosef. Deep generative
  modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nature Methods, 15(12):1053–1058, 2018. doi: 10.1038/
  s41592-018-0229-2.

Marcos López-De-Castro, Alberto García-Galindo, José González-Gomariz, and Rubén Armañanzas. Con-
 formal inference for reliable single cell RNA-seq annotation. Bioinformatics, 41(10):btaf521, 2025. doi:
 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaf521.

Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform manifold approximation and projection
  for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1802.03426.

Tabula Sapiens Consortium. The Tabula Sapiens: A multiple-organ, single-cell transcriptomic atlas of
  humans. Science, 376(6594):eabl4896, 2022. doi: 10.1126/science.abl4896.

Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
  Springer, 2005. doi: 10.1007/b106715.

Chenling Xu, Romain Lopez, Edouard Mehlman, Jeffrey Regier, Michael I Jordan, and Nir Yosef. Prob-
  abilistic harmonization and annotation of single-cell transcriptomics data with deep generative models.
  Molecular Systems Biology, 17(1):e9620, 2021. doi: 10.15252/msb.20209620.

Yunpei Xu, Shaokai Wang, Qilong Feng, Jiazhi Xia, Yaohang Li, Hong-Dong Li, and Jianxin Wang. scCAD:
  Cluster decomposition-based anomaly detection for rare cell identiﬁcation in single-cell expression data.
  Nature Communications, 15(1):7561, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-51891-9.




                                                    13
Figure 7: Rescue in the scANVI latent space (immune dendritic cells). Cells missed by scANVI that
lie near the rare cluster are recovered (recall 0.72 → 0.90), whereas geometrically distant rare cells remain
missed, illustrating the recall ceiling discussed in Section 4.




                                                     14
